OK, so we've changed our
symbology to how we want and our
map is starting to come
together.
So in this video we're going to
prepare our map to be exported.
So to do that in QGIS we need to
first of all create a print
layout.
So we do this by going into the
project tab at the top, going
down near the bottom to where it
says New Print Layout.
We'll click on this and it's
going to come up this window
that's prompting us to name our
layout.
So let's call it Ziama Landscape
and click OK.
So that's going to bring up a
new window, our Print Layout
window, which is a blank page.
And so we can access our map
window again just by minimising
this.
And then we can still access our
map.
And then we can just go back
into our print layout.
So we can work in both of them
just by minimising the windows.
And now we're going to add our
map.
So we'll do that by going into
Add item in the top menu and
clicking add Map.
And this is going to give us a
tool that's going to let us draw
our map onto our page wherever
we want it.
So draw a square for your map.
And now we can see our map has
come up and our map is a bit
smaller than we want it.
So what we need to do is we need
to be able to interact with our
map within this map frame, and
to do that we have to click on
the button in the left hand
side, which is move item
content.
It's the fourth one down.
We could also do that by going
into item properties if we have
our map selected, and there's
also a button in there to do
that.
But we'll just do it using the
one on the left hand side.
And now we've clicked that we
can interact with our map, we
can zoom it in to how we want
and we can move it around to how
we want.
So get that looking how you want
it to look, and now if you
wanted to resize your map frame,
you don't like how it is.
You can click on the third
button in the toolbar, so the
one just above the one that we'd
clicked on, and now you can move
it and resize it to how you
want.
And the top hand button just
lets you move around your layout
page without touching or moving
any of the elements on your
page.
And now we'll take a look at the
layout of this print layout
view.
So it's quite similar to the map
view that we had when we're
working within our map.
We've got the same sort of
layout with toolbars across the
top and a menu bar across the
very top and so we'll have a
look at the different tabs that
we have within the menu bar now.
So the first one is layout and
this is similar to project
within the map view.
So this is where we could save
our project.
We can create a new layout and
within this section we can
export our map as well.
And then looking at the edit
tab.
In here we have undo and redo
buttons as well as copy and
paste functions, and we also
have options for selecting and
moving around our layout in
view.
We have options for zooming and
we can also set a grid or guides
in here and these help us align
our map and map elements.
We have rulers and guides
toggled on and so this is why we
can see the measurements around
the sides of our page around the
top on the left hand side.
These are our rulers and the
guides will pop up when we move
items around and these help us
align our items in view.
We can also toggle our toolbars
and panels on and off.
In items we can group the things
that we add onto our layout
together and we can also
organise them to bring them to
the front or to the back.
And in here we can also lock
items, align them and resize
them.
Add item is a really useful
section so this is where we can
add in a lot of the elements
into our print layout that we
might want.
So this is where we went to add
in our map frame.
There's also options for adding
pictures and labels and legends,
shapes and arrows.
We're going to take a look at
adding a scale bar.
So we're going to click where it
says add scale bar and this is
going to give us the draw mouse
again so we can draw it onto our
map.
And there's our scale bar.
So if we wanted to change this
further to suit our preferences,
we can just either click on it
within our map frame or within
the items panel.
Here on the right hand side we
make sure it's selected.
Then we can go into item
properties which is just below.
And this is where we have all
the options for changing how our
scale bar looks and like the
scale bar units.
For example position and size.
So this is where we have all of
the different options for
setting our preferences.
Let's also take a look at adding
a north arrow.
So we'll do that by going back
into add item and go on add
north arrow.
So adding a N arrow isn't
normally necessary unless your
map isn't orientated north, but
we'll do it anyway just to have
a look at how you do it.
And now you can see that we have
these guidelines popping up to
help us align our elements.
So let's draw our north arrow on
and now we can resize this and
move it around to how we want it
to be.
And again to change the north
arrow.
To get it exactly how we want
it, we can click on it in our
map frame or within the items,
and now we can access the item
properties and we can change it
to exactly how we want.
Let's take a look at the other
tabs that we've not gone through
yet.
So we have the Atlas tab.
We're not going to worry too
much about this.
We would use this if we wanted
to make a map template to
publish a large number of
similar maps for different
geographic locations.
In settings we can access our
layout options.
So this is where we set our
preferences for how we want our
layout page to function or look.
And then again underneath this
menu bar we have our toolbars.
So we've got some quick access
buttons that we can use within
here and if we right click we
can also access where we can
toggle the panels and toolbars
on and off.
In the left hand side we've got
these quick buttons as well.
So this is some of the ones that
we've been using like to be able
to interact with our map or move
around our layout or select our
items.
So there's some really useful
quick access buttons here.
Let's take a look on the right
hand side.
So in here we have our items.
This is where we've been
selecting our items.
We also have toggle boxes for
each item so we can turn them on
and off.
And we have boxes to lock the
items as well to lock them into
place.
And now we can't move it.
And we can also drag them up and
down in here.
And so we could put elements on
top of each other, like we've
just moved the map to the top.
The tab just next to items is
undo history.
And this is where we can see the
history of all the things that
we've done within our layout.
And we can click on one of them
to go back to what we had done
before.
And now we'll take a look at the
window underneath our items.
And so we have our item
properties that we've been
using.
But let's take a look at the
layout.
So layout.
We just have some preferences
for the actual layout of our
page, so things like our guides
and grids, export functions, and
resizing our layout.
So we've already taken a look at
the Item properties tab, but
we'll just take a look at our
map properties.
So we'll make sure our map is
selected in our items.
And now let's look at the map
item properties.
So what we can have access to
now is the buttons that are at
the top.
And so we have some buttons for
changing the extent of our map.
We also have a button to access
the bookmarks within our map.
So for example, the Italy
bookmark that we created, we can
now go and access that and we
have the button as well for
being able to interact within
our map, so to move it around
and zoom in and out.
And then within item properties,
we can change the scale of our
map, the rotation we could
manually change the extent of
our map and scrolling down,
we've got lots of other options.
So you can just play around and
change your map to exactly how
you want.
We're going to take a look at
adding grid lines.
So to do that we need to click
on this green plus symbol here
underneath where it says grids
and we can select the grid we
added and click modify grid and
now this is going to let us add
our grid in.
So at the moment we can't see
our grid even though we added it
because we need to set the
intervals.
First of all for grid type we
want it to be solid.
This is going to make some solid
lines over our map, and then for
interval we'll set this as map
units.
So which unit this is depends on
the projected coordinate system
of your map.
If your map coordinate system is
in degrees, you'll want
something like 0.00001 intervals
in this X&Y box.
But our map coordinate system is
in metres, so something around
10,000 should work well.
So let's put that in the X&Y
box.
And now we have our grid lines,
but we want to add some labels.
So we're going to add some ticks
and labels.
To add our ticks we can scroll
down and go into the frame
section and under frame style we
can put exterior ticks.
And this just added the little
tick marks around the outside of
our map.
And now let's add our labels.
So to do that we'll Scroll down
to where it says draw
coordinates and toggle the box
on.
And now we've got some labels,
so let's change the format
because we want decimal with
suffix and that's going to give
us the north and West
so we know that we're looking at
the longitude and the latitude,
and we can set lots of different
preferences in this section.
So have a play around with these
different buttons to get your
grid lines and your labels to
how you want.
We're just going to change the
coordinate position for for now,
so we're just going to put zero
here just to get rid of those
unnecessary decimal points.
So that's how to add grids, and
that's all the main buttons and
layouts of the print layout
window in QGIS.
The last thing we're going to
talk about is how to get your
layout back up if you
accidentally shut it.
So if you accidentally hit the X
button and you needed to get it
back up, go in your map view in
your project and you can go in
the Project tab, go into the
layouts and now you can access
your layout again.